# multicubic-spline
Multicubic spline library in C: bicubic, tricubic, quadcubic and quintcubic splines of a function tabulated on a rectilinear, irregularly-spaced grid.

Multicubic Interpolation of Gridded Data Using Cascades of 1-D Cubic Splines

by Robert W. Strickland

An algorithm for cubic spline interpolation of a smooth function of more than one variable is presented. The method interpolates a smooth function that is tabulated on a rectilinear grid of the independent variables.  The gridded sample points need not be equally-spaced.  The method relies on fitting one-dimensional cubic splines to each independent variable in turn.  The concept of a cascaded spline (a spline of spline coefficients) is introduced. These coefficients are calcuated and tabulated ahead of time.  To evaluate the multicubic spline, the algorithm begins by searching the grid for the hyper-rectangle bounding the point of interest. It then slices the hyper-rectangle, interpolating the cascade of splines along one axis to eliminate one dependent variable. This reduces the dimensionality of the hyper-rectangle by one.  The slicing process continues until a line segment remains. One final 1-D interpolation yields the value at the point of interest.  All 1-D spline coefficients (and cascades thereof) are calculated ahead of time. The resulting multicubic spline surface has continuous first and second derivatives without requiring any explicit calculation or matching of derivatives. Formulations for cubic splines for functions of two, three, four and five independent variables are presented.  These splines require only 3, 7, 15 and 29 coefficients, respectively, per point of the rectilinear grid. Once the hyper-rectangle containing the point of interest is located, the algorithm is deterministic and takes the same amount of calculation per interpolated point.  The author has made available a prototype implementation in ANSI C for splines of two to five independent variables.
